<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Archibald Constable</i>, iii. 104. <a href="foreword.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Gillies, p. 236. <a href="foreword.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mr. Lockhart, who married Sir Walter's daughter, was descended from James Nimmo, who fought for the Covenant at Bothwell Bridge. <i>See</i> Appendix to Nimmo’s “Narrative” (Scots Historical Society). <a href="foreword.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Charles Kirkpatrick Sharpe’s Correspondence</i>, vol. ii. Blackwood, Edinburgh, 1888. <a href="foreword.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The copy in the Editor’s collection omits the words “True Blue,” and does not give Haldane’s name, nor that of his associate, Leslie, on the title-page. The tract has been regarded as a Tory squib, but this view is improbable. <a href="foreword.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Journal</i>, i. 117. <a href="foreword.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>An essay by Mr. George Ormond, based on manuscripts in the <i>Edinburgh Record</i> office (<i>Scottish Review</i>, July, 1892), adds little to what is known about the Porteous Riot. It is said that Porteous was let down alive, and hanged again, more than once, that his arm was broken by a Lochaber axe, and that a torch was applied to the foot from which the shoe had fallen. A pamphlet of 1787 says that Robertson became a spy on smugglers in Holland, returned to London, procured a pardon through the Butcher Cumberland, and “at last died in misery in London.” It is plain that Colonel Moyle might have rescued Porteous, but he was naturally cautious about entering the city gates without a written warrant from the civil authorities. <a href="foreword.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“They were tolerated,” says Wodrow, “because not a few among their leading men were in a close friendship with the Jesuits.” Wodrow also imagines that Scott’s ancestor, Lord Swinton, was spared when Argyle was executed, by the intercession of “some papists about the court.” In “The Humble Proposals of Mr. Alexander Shields to the General Assembly of 1690,” Quakerism is classed with “Popery, Blasphemy, and all Idolatry and Heresy, <em>highly provoking to the Lord Jesus</em>.” (“Biographia Presbyteriana” ii. xxxii.) Jedediah Cleishbotham refers to all those matters of his Quaker ancestors, because Dr. McCrie, in his assault on “Old Mortality,” had spoken of the author as necessarily a descendant either of Cavaliers or of Covenanters. <a href="preface-1.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><a href="notes.xhtml#note-a">Note A.</a> Author’s connection with Quakerism. <a href="preface-1.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><a href="notes.xhtml#note-b">Note B.</a> Tombstone to Helen Walker. <a href="preface-2.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>His honour Gilbert Goslinn of Gandercleugh; for I love to be precise in matters of importance.⁠—J. C. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A well-known debating club in Edinburgh. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Lord Provost was ex-officio commander and colonel of the corps, which might be increased to three hundred men when the times required it. No other drum but theirs was allowed to sound on the High Street between the Luckenbooths and the Netherbow. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Robert Fergusson, the Scottish Poet, born 1750, died 1774. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This hook was to enable the bearer of the Lochaber-axe to scale a gateway, by grappling the top of the door, and swinging himself up by the staff of his weapon. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-16" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This ancient corps is now entirely disbanded. Their last march to do duty at Hallowfair had something in it affecting. Their drums and fifes had been wont on better days to play, on this joyous occasion, the lively tune of “Jockey to the fair”; but on this final occasion the afflicted veterans moved slowly to the dirge of “The last time I came ower the muir.” <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-17" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The signatures affixed to the death-warrant of Captain Porteous were⁠—</p>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>Andrew Fletcher of Milton, Lord Justice-Clerk.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Sir James Mackenzie, Lord Royston.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>David Erskine, Lord Dun.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Sir Walter Pringle, Lord Newhall.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Sir Gilbert Elliot, Lord Minto.</p>
						</li>
					</ul>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-18" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There is a tradition, that while a little stream was swollen into a torrent by recent showers, the discontented voice of the Water Spirit was heard to pronounce these words. At the some moment a man, urged on by his fate, or, in Scottish language, <i>fey,</i> arrived at a gallop, and prepared to cross the water. No remonstrance from the bystanders was of power to stop him⁠—he plunged into the stream, and perished. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-19" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Maitland calls it Best’s Wynd, and later writers Beth’s Wynd. As the name implies, it was an open thoroughfare or alley leading from the Lawnmarket, and extended in a direct line between the old Tolbooth to near the head of the Cowgate. It was partly destroyed by fire in 1786, and was totally removed in 1809, preparatory to the building of the new libraries of the Faculty of Advocates and writers to the Signet. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-20" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A nobleman was called a Lord of State. The Senators of the College of Justice were termed Lords of Seat, or of the Session. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-21" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Close-head,</i> the entrance of a blind alley. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-22" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>
							<span>Wide is the fronting gate, and, raised on high,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>With adamantine columns threats the sky;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Vain is the force of man, and Heaven’s as vain,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To crush the pillars which the pile sustain:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Sublime on these a tower of steel is rear’d.</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<cite>Dryden’s <i>Virgil,</i> Book vi.</cite>
						<a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-22" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-23" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A near relation of the author’s used to tell of having been stopped by the rioters, and escorted home in the manner described. On reaching her own home one of her attendants, in the appearance a <i>baxter</i>, i.e., a baker’s lad, handed her out of her chair, and took leave with a bow, which, in the lady’s opinion, argued breeding that could hardly be learned at the oven’s mouth. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-23" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-24" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><a href="notes.xhtml#note-c">Note C.</a> The Old Tolbooth. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-24" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-25" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This little incident, characteristic of the extreme composure of this extraordinary mob, was witnessed by a lady, who, disturbed like others from her slumbers, had gone to the window. It was told to the Author by the lady’s daughter. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-25" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-26" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><a href="notes.xhtml#note-d">Note D.</a> Memorial concerning the murder of Captain Porteous. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-26" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-27" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A beautiful and solid pathway has, within a few years, been formed around these romantic rocks; and the Author has the pleasure to think, that the passage in the text gave rise to the undertaking. <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-27" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-28" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dumbiedikes, selected as descriptive of the taciturn character of the imaginary owner, is really the name of a house bordering on the King’s Park, so called because the late Mr. Braidwood, an instructor of the deaf and dumb, resided there with his pupils. The situation of the real house is different from that assigned to the ideal mansion. <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-28" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-29" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Immediately previous to the Revolution, the students at the Edinburgh College were violent anti-catholics. They were strongly suspected of burning the house of Prestonfield, belonging to Sir James Dick, the Lord Provost; and certainly were guilty of creating considerable riots in 1688⁠–⁠9. <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-29" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-30" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Author has been flattered by the assurance, that this <i>naive</i> mode of recommending arboriculture (which was actually delivered in these very words by a Highland laird, while on his death-bed, to his son) had so much weight with a Scottish earl as to lead to his planting a large tract of country. <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-30" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-31" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Cheverons</i>⁠—gloves. <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-31" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-32" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><a href="notes.xhtml#note-e">Note E.</a> Carspharn John. <a href="chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-32" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-33" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The late Mrs. Elizabeth Hamilton. <a href="chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-33" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-34" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><a href="notes.xhtml#note-f">Note F.</a> Peter Walker. <a href="chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-34" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-35" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This custom of making a mark by folding a leaf in the party’s Bible, when a solemn resolution is formed, is still held to be, in some sense, an appeal to Heaven for his or her sincerity. <a href="chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-35" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-36" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><a href="notes.xhtml#note-g">Note G.</a> Muschat’s Cairn. <a href="chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-36" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-37" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>James Dundas younger of Arniston was tried in the year 1711 upon charge of leasing-making, in having presented, from the Duchess of Gordon, medal of the Pretender, for the purpose, it was said, of affronting Queen Anne. <a href="chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-37" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-38" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Uncle. <a href="chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-38" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-39" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><a href="notes.xhtml#note-h">Note H.</a> Hangman, or Lockman. <a href="chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-39" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-40" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><a href="notes.xhtml#note-i">Note I.</a> The Fairy Boy of Leith. <a href="chapter-15.xhtml#noteref-40" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-41" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><a href="notes.xhtml#note-j">Note J.</a> Intercourse of the Covenanters with the Invisible World. <a href="chapter-15.xhtml#noteref-41" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-42" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><a href="notes.xhtml#note-g">Note G.</a> Muschat’s Cairn. <a href="chapter-15.xhtml#noteref-42" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-43" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><a href="notes.xhtml#note-k">Note K.</a> Child-Murder. <a href="chapter-15.xhtml#noteref-43" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-44" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A Scottish form of procedure, answering, in some respects, to the English Habeas Corpus. <a href="chapter-16.xhtml#noteref-44" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-45" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Among the flying leaves of the period, there is one called “Sutherland’s Lament for the loss of his post,—with his advice, to John Daglees his successor.” He was whipped and banished 25th July 1722.</p>
					<p>There is another, called the Speech and dying words of John Dalgleish, lockman <i>alias</i> hangman of Edinburgh, containing these lines:—</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>
							<span>Death, I’ve a Favour for to beg,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That ye wad only gie a Fleg,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i5">And spare my Life;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>As I did to ill-hanged Megg,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i5">The Webster’s Wife.</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-16.xhtml#noteref-45" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-46" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Elshin</i>, a shoemaker’s awl. <a href="chapter-17.xhtml#noteref-46" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-47" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><a href="notes.xhtml#note-l">Note L.</a> Calumniator of the Fair Sex. <a href="chapter-18.xhtml#noteref-47" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-48" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This was a name given to a tract of sand hillocks extending along the sea-shore from Leith to Portobello, and which at this time were covered with <i>whin</i>-bushes or furze.</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-49" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The magistrates were closely interrogated before the House of Peers, concerning the particulars of the Porteous Mob, and the <i>patois</i> in which these functionaries made their answers, sounded strange in the ears of the Southern nobles. The Duke of Newcastle having demanded to know with what kind of shot the guard which Porteous commanded had loaded their muskets, was answered, naively, “Ow, just sic as ane shoots <i>dukes and fools</i> with.” This reply was considered as a contempt of the House of Lords, and the Provost would have suffered accordingly, but that the Duke of Argyle explained, that the expression, properly rendered into English, meant <i>ducks and waterfowls</i>. <a href="chapter-18.xhtml#noteref-49" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-50" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><a href="notes.xhtml#note-m">Note M.</a> Sir William Dick of Braid. <a href="chapter-18.xhtml#noteref-50" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-51" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I think so too⁠—But if the reader be curious, he may consult Mr. Chambers’s <i>Traditions of Edinburgh</i>. <a href="chapter-18.xhtml#noteref-51" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-52" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <i>Life of Peden</i>, p. 14. <a href="chapter-18.xhtml#noteref-52" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-53" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. M. 26th Foot. <a href="chapter-18.xhtml#noteref-54" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-54" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <a href="notes.xhtml#note-f">Note F.</a> Peter Walker. <a href="chapter-18.xhtml#noteref-54" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-55" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>All various species of the great genus Cameronian. <a href="chapter-18.xhtml#noteref-55" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-56" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This remarkable convocation took place upon 15th June 1682, and an account of its confused and divisive proceedings may be found in Michael Shield’s <i>Faithful Contendings Displayed</i> (first printed at Glasgow, 1780, p. 21). It affords a singular and melancholy example how much a metaphysical and polemical spirit had crept in amongst these unhappy sufferers, since amid so many real injuries which they had to sustain, they were disposed to add disagreement and disunion concerning the character and extent of such as were only imaginary. <a href="chapter-18.xhtml#noteref-56" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-57" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The gallows. <a href="chapter-20.xhtml#noteref-57" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-58" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Swearing. <a href="chapter-20.xhtml#noteref-58" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-59" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Kissed the book. <a href="chapter-20.xhtml#noteref-59" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-60" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Tobacco-pouch. <a href="chapter-20.xhtml#noteref-60" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-61" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A kind of worsted gloves, used by the lower orders. <a href="chapter-21.xhtml#noteref-61" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-62" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I.e. was able to do. <a href="chapter-23.xhtml#noteref-62" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-63" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I.e. the quieter. <a href="chapter-23.xhtml#noteref-63" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-64" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Avoid the gallows. <a href="chapter-23.xhtml#noteref-64" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-65" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The notorious Mandrin was known as the Captain-General of French smugglers. See a Tract on his exploits, printed 1753. <a href="chapter-24.xhtml#noteref-65" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-66" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><a href="notes.xhtml#note-n">Note N.</a> Doomster, or Dempster, of Court. <a href="chapter-24.xhtml#noteref-66" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-67" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><a href="notes.xhtml#note-o">Note O.</a> John Duke of Argyle and Greenwich. <a href="chapter-24.xhtml#noteref-67" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-68" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Red John the warrior, a name personal and proper in the Highlands to John Duke of Argyle and Greenwich, as MacCummin was that of his race or dignity. <a href="chapter-24.xhtml#noteref-68" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-69" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In 1828, the Author presented to the Roxburgh Club a curious volume containing the “Proceedings in the Court-Martial held upon John, Master of Sinclair, for the murder of Ensign Schaw, and Captain Schaw, 17th October 1708.” <a href="chapter-25.xhtml#noteref-69" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-70" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pass. <a href="chapter-25.xhtml#noteref-70" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-71" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Seal. <a href="chapter-25.xhtml#noteref-71" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-72" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Justice of Peace. <a href="chapter-25.xhtml#noteref-72" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-73" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The executioner, in livery of black or dark grey and silver, likened by low wit to a magpie. <a href="chapter-27.xhtml#noteref-73" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-74" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>He meant, probably, <i>stillicidium</i>. <a href="chapter-27.xhtml#noteref-74" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-75" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>By dint of assiduous research I am enabled to certiorate the reader, that the name of this person was Saunders Broadfoot, and that he dealt in the wholesome commodity called kirn-milk (<i>Anglicé,</i> butter-milk).⁠— J. C. <a href="chapter-27.xhtml#noteref-75" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-76" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The fact is certain. The single epistle was addressed to the principal director of the British Linen Company. <a href="chapter-28.xhtml#noteref-76" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-77" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The last three days of March, old style, are called the Borrowing Days; for, as they are remarked to be unusually stormy, it is feigned that March had borrowed them from April, to extend the sphere of his rougher sway. The rhyme on the subject is quoted in the glossary to Leyden’s edition of the “Complaynt of Scotland”⁠—</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>
							<span>[March said to Aperill,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I see three hogs<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-78" id="noteref-78" epub:type="noteref">78</a> upon a hill,</span>
						</p>
						<hr/>
						<p>
							<span>But when the borrowed days were gane</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The three silly hogs came hirplin hame.]</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-28.xhtml#noteref-77" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-78" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A young sheep before it has lost its first fleece. <a href="endnotes.xhtml#noteref-78" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-79" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>John Emery, an eminent comedian, played successfully at Covent Garden Theatre between 1798 and 1820. Among his characters, were those of Dandie Dinmont in <i>Guy Mannering</i>, Dougal in <i>Rob Roy</i>, and Ratcliffe in <i>The Heart of Mid-Lothian</i>. <a href="chapter-29.xhtml#noteref-79" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-80" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Concealed a knife. <a href="chapter-30.xhtml#noteref-80" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-81" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lay ourselves down to sleep. <a href="chapter-30.xhtml#noteref-81" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-82" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A homely proverb, signifying better wed a neighbour than one fetched from a distance.⁠—Mixen signifies dunghill. <a href="chapter-31.xhtml#noteref-82" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-83" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Author of the <i>Union of Honour</i>, a treatise on English Heraldry. London, 1641. <a href="chapter-32.xhtml#noteref-83" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-84" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A proverbial and punning expression in that county, to intimate that a person is not very clever. <a href="chapter-32.xhtml#noteref-84" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-85" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Crabbe’s <i>Borough</i>, Letter xii. <a href="chapter-34.xhtml#noteref-85" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-86" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Horace Walpole’s <i>Reminiscences</i>. <a href="chapter-37.xhtml#noteref-86" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-87" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The hilly pastures of Buckholm, which the Author now surveys⁠—“Not in the frenzy of a dreamer’s eye,”⁠—are famed for producing the best ewe-milk cheese in the south of Scotland. <a href="chapter-38.xhtml#noteref-87" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-88" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It’s an ill bird that fouls its own nest. <a href="chapter-39.xhtml#noteref-88" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-89" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><a href="notes.xhtml#note-p">Note P.</a> Expulsion of the Scotch Bishops. <a href="chapter-39.xhtml#noteref-89" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-90" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><a href="notes.xhtml#note-q">Note Q.</a> Half-hanged Maggie Dickson. <a href="chapter-40.xhtml#noteref-90" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-91" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><a href="notes.xhtml#note-r">Note R.</a> Madge Wildfire. <a href="chapter-40.xhtml#noteref-91" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-92" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In 1725, there was a great riot in Glasgow on account of the malt-tax. Among the troops brought in to restore order, was one of the independent companies of Highlanders levied in Argyleshire, and distinguished, in a lampoon of the period, as “Campbell of Carrick and his Highland thieves.” It was called Shawfield’s Mob, because much of the popular violence was directed against Daniel Campbell, Esq. of Shawfield, M. P., Provost of the town. <a href="chapter-41.xhtml#noteref-92" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-93" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>From Southey’s <i>Thalaba</i>, Book xi. stanza 36. <a href="chapter-41.xhtml#noteref-93" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-94" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Her’ship, a Scottish word which may be said to be now obsolete; because, fortunately, the practice of “plundering by armed force,” which is its meaning, does not require to be commonly spoken of. <a href="chapter-42.xhtml#noteref-94" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-95" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><a href="notes.xhtml#note-s">Note S.</a> Death of Francis Gordon. <a href="chapter-43.xhtml#noteref-95" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-96" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is, more correctly speaking, a peninsula. <a href="chapter-44.xhtml#noteref-95" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-97" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ross’s <i>Fortunate Shepherdess.</i> Edit. 1778, p. 23. <a href="chapter-45.xhtml#noteref-97" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-98" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><a href="notes.xhtml#note-t">Note T.</a> Tolling to Service in Scotland. <a href="chapter-45.xhtml#noteref-98" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-99" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Arnot’s <i>Criminal Trials,</i> 4to ed. p. 235. <a href="chapter-51.xhtml#noteref-99" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-100" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There seems an anachronism in the history of this person. Ratcliffe, among other escapes from justice, was released by the Porteous mob when under sentence of death; and he was again under the same predicament, when the Highlanders made a similar jail-delivery in 1745. He was too sincere a whig to embrace liberation at the hands of the Jacobites, and in reward was made one of the keepers of the Tolbooth. So at least runs constant tradition. <a href="chapter-51.xhtml#noteref-100" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-101" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ethwald. <a href="chapter-52.xhtml#noteref-101" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-102" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Douglas’s <i>Baronage</i>, page 215. <a href="notes.xhtml#noteref-102" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-103" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is not so certain. Few persons now living are likely to remember the interior of the old Tolbooth, with narrow staircase, thick walls, and small apartments, nor to imagine that it could ever have been used for these purposes. Robert Chambers, in his <i>Minor Antiquities of Edinburgh</i>, has preserved ground-plans or sections, which clearly show this⁠—the largest hall was on the second floor, and measuring 27 feet by 20, and 12 feet high. It may have been intended for the meetings of Town Council, while the Parliament assembled, after 1560, in what was called the Upper Tolbooth, that is the south-west portion of the Collegiate Church of St. Giles, until the year 1640, when the present Parliament House was completed. Being no longer required for such a purpose, it was set apart by the Town Council on the 24th December 1641 as a distinct church, with the name of the Tolbooth parish, and therefore could not have derived the name from its vicinity to the Tolbooth, as usually stated. <a href="notes.xhtml#noteref-103" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
